---
title: Myanmar First Take
date: 2019-12-19
location: Yangon
country: Myanmar
description: >-
   I walk down colonial era streets that course with cosmopolitan energy. My
   WiFi runs on a mesh network, but is powered by a grid that goes dark one
   quarter of the year. Old and new seems to blend fluidly into an altogether
   indescribable phenomena.
template: writing
tags:
   - political science
   - history
---

It's a busy time. The President has finally been impeached (I predicted it would
be less than a year, but hey first term still feels within the margin of error),
the holidays have arrived (bringing either respite or anxiety depending on who
you ask), and the last Star Wars (at least for this decade) is about to be
released! All the way out here in Myanmar, I've rediscovered my appreciation for
these small American cultural touchstones.

Yes, for those I have not updated, I am now in Myanmar (occasionally called
Burma, a topic we can broach at a later time). I've been here for almost three
weeks, based in Yangon, the largest city and de facto capital (why it's no
longer the actual capital is another interesting conversation). I've found
Myanmar so fascinating precisely because these conversations are so fresh.
Myanmar was ruled exclusively by military dictatorship from 1962 to 2010. They
had their first (not really) real election in 2010, and only had a (slight more)
real election in 2015. This political history creates a jarring duality that
permeates almost every aspect of Burmese life. Never miss a post!

In my first weeks in Myanmar, I am constantly struck by a barrage of paradoxes.
I walk down colonial era streets that course with cosmopolitan energy. My WiFi
runs on a mesh network with custom coded load balancers, but is powered by a
grid that goes dark one quarter of the year. Old and new seem to blend fluidly
into an altogether indescribable phenomena.

One the one hand, not too much has changed since 1962. I've already spent entire
days walking along Yangon streets lined entirely by British colonial-constructed
buildings. Insurance does not really exist here. I've read reports that some
government offices still forgo computers. And every morning on my way to work, I
pass by a CD shop, and while I know CD's are supposedly a modern technology,
this above all else makes living in Yangon feel like time travel.

<Subscribe />

But on the other hand, debates that feel strangled by their own history in the
U.S. are violently alive here in Myanmar. Not than all of this liveliness is
necessarily hopeful. The transition from military rule to civilian-led democracy
is certainly not going according to plan. In many ways is going calamitously
wrong, like last week when Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize winning
civilian leader, went in front of the International Court of Justice to defend
that same military against accusations of genocide. Such moments feel so
consequential, however, precisely because the nation has only existed on the
global stage for such a short period of time.

Every decision (the name of the country and location of the capital only the
first among many) takes on the importance of a nation defining itself for the
first time. I don't just mean this metaphorically either. Declaring independence
from the British Empire in 1948, it only took months before the country had
fallen into multiple civil wars. Depending on how you cross your T's and dot you
I's, you can even argue that some of those wars are still ongoing. But no one
disputes that democracy was killed on March 2, 1962, when General Ne Win staged
his coup. From that day until November 8, 2015, the country's existence was
defined exclusively by the generals.

The person tasked with bringing democracy back, of course, is "Daw Su," an
honorific that literally translates to "Auntie Su." Keep in mind that Aung San
Suu Kyi is the daughter of Aung San, the revolutionary who is credited with
freeing Burma from British rule back in 1947. Murdered six months before
independence was formally declared, he is still considered the father of the
nation. To be fair, America has had three sets of father-child rulers. But the
irony remains that Myanmar's hope for true democracy is predicated on
continuously electing their founder's daughter. Again, here in Myanmar, old and
new seem to exist within one another.

Trying to describe this feeling to my roommate, an American who has been based
in Myanmar since 2013, he came up with the phrase "time-warp of anachronisms."
I'm not quite sure what it means either, but we both agree it feels appropriate.
