---
title: The Local Bus to Langtang
date: 2019-11-21
location: Kathmandu
country: Nepal
description: >-
   The local bus to Langtang is a bottomless well of surprises.
template: writing
tags:
   - Hiking
   - Transit
   - Outdoors
---

The local bus to Langtang is a bottomless well of surprises, and it only gets
zanier the higher we go. The Kathmandu bus stop is is at 1295 meters. I am
ingloriously thrown out of the taxi cab with nothing more than an extended
finger for direction. The cabby is pointing into a morass of people, and when I
turn back with a look of utter confusion, he just gesticulates even more
wildly–waving his hands in all directions at once. I stare at him speechless. He
drives away.

It's six in the morning, and I begin looking through the web of adorned buses,
vegetable stands, and piles of burlap sacks. I spot a few words in English, and
luckily, I recognize one. "Dunche," my ultimate destination. I run up to the
counter and begin repeating my magic word. "Dunche!" I exclaim. No response.

"Dunche. Dunche! Trekking! Trek!" I add for good measure and point to my
backpack. With this, the ticket man gives solemn acknowledgement. "500" he says.
This is a stunning price for an eight hour bus ride. It converts to about $4.50.
Taxis charge three times as much to take a tourist across town. I'm am actually
dubious he had understood me correctly.

I try some clarifying questions. "Langtang trek?" "Express bus?" "Stops? How
many?" He just keeps nodding, not even looking at me. I am not convinced, but I
have nothing else to go on. "When does it leave?" He finally looks up from
counting my bills and points to a blue bus directly behind me. "Now."

The night before I was doing my research, trying to determine how I would make
it to my Langtang trek. The park is only 80 kilometers from Kathmandu, but the
roads have remained almost impassable since a devastating earthquake cut off the
region in 2015. TripAdvisor recommended against the local bus to Langtang, one
reviewer citing things like "congested seating, bad smelling floor, too many
passengers as if they are made sheep and goats in the pen." I suppose he didn't
ride one of the buses with actual sheep.

My bus is largely full when I first board (or so I thought at the time). Some
one gestures me to an empty seat, the first row aisle. Little did I know this
would become the best seat in the house. Langtang National Park is due north of
Kathmandu. Having arrived only 36 hours previously, I didn't have my bearings in
Nepal yet, but I knew this much–I am supposed to go north.

I had decided not to buy a SIM card while in Nepal, as most of my short stay
would be spent either trekking in the Himalayas or secluded in a silent
meditation retreat. The idea was to disconnect completely. Instead, I found
myself frantically checking my phone every five minutes, trying to see where
this bus was going. Again, I had no service, so I just had to pray that the tiny
blue GPS dot would pop up on my horribly pixelated Google map of Kathmandu. Half
an hour in, it finally appeared. We were headed due west.

I lean over to the person next to me and begin frantically repeating my magic
word: "Dunche?" He just turns away. Next I turn to one of two young men who are
standing in the doorway of the bus, who I am quickly realizing were the
"conductors" of this whole operation, shepherding people on and off the bus,
making sure people pay, etc. They are boys, really, both wearing tight jeans,
fashionable sneakers, gold piercings, shaved side burns–and adorned with
matching man buns on top. They both wave away my concern. I motion as if I
should leave the bus. They motion for me to sit down and shut up.

At 440 meters, we make a much needed turn right. Three hours into the ride,
we've finally begun heading north, and I settle into my seat a little easier.
It's time to begin our ascent up the mountain. By 700 meters in elevation, the
bus has actually completely filled, standing room only. But people keep filing
on. I quickly realize this is not the express bus. We are stopping every 20
minutes to take on and depart with local passengers. It's a shuttle service up
the mountain. Some people deposit bags of rice or other goods, and others will
retrieve those goods hours later and thousands of meters higher.

Around 1100 meters, the first chicken comes on board. A few meters later, we
pass a goat riding on the roof of a bus headed in the other direction. At 1200,
the first family gets on board. Each stop is only a second or two. Embarking has
to be one fluid motion, but the entire floor is now covered with bags of food,
luggage, and even a few passengers.

Before the mother can nestle herself in, the bus lurches forward, and she nearly
throws her baby into the lap of one of the conductors. He happily embraces the
child, and actually rocks it for the remainder of the journey. This is just how
the local bus to Langtang works. Everyone is getting up the mountain together.

The road conditions have long since deteriorated to beyond abysmal. There are no
shoulders or barricades, but that doesn't deter the driver from overtaking
everything in sight. Motorcycles, small children, dump trucks–it's all the same
to our man at the wheel, something to be surpassed at maximum speed. When the
road is too narrow to pass (keep in mind the road is always too narrow to pass
by my standards) he honks at the oncoming traffic until they reverse and make
room.

More than once, I look over the edge to stare down 1000 meters into oblivion.
The shear scale of the range is vertigo inducing, and many passengers are
suffering acutely. The conductors dole out clear plastic vomit bags with the
same grace and agility that they arrange everything else. The riders puke
discretely, then dispose with their parcels out the window. No one seems to
think much of this.

When the stimulation is too much–the flapping of chicken wings, the blaring of
Nepali pop music, the smell of sweat, dirt, and produce–I just close my eyes,
have my body go limp, and let the violent rocking of the bus lull me into a
perverse kind of trance state.

We stop for lunch around 1500 meters, which is indicated by the conductor
shouting at me and putting his fingers to his lips, signing for "food." We fill
a small restaurant hanging off the side of a cliff where an old man quickly
dispenses a fixed plate meal of dal bhat (lentils and rice), marinated chicken,
and vegetable curry. It's delicious, and we all begin ravenously shoveling it
into our mouths with our fingers. It's a race to win each plate: can we clean it
before the server arrives to re-pile yet more food.

Across from me sits a young boy, and when I'm not chewing, I introduce myself.
His name is "Picas," and he's come down from his village to buy textbooks. I ask
him his favorite subject, and he replies science. I press him for specifics, and
he says physics. I tell him I'm impressed. As we finish, Picas insists on
showing me the small town we've stopped in, and more troubling, in buying me
everything within sight. He offers me water, mints, half of the fruits and
vegetables in a nearby stand. I eventually relent and take a pomegranate, which
I think he thinks I've never seen before.

After approximately an hour on the most dangerous road yet, we arrive in Dunche,
1995 meters, and the conductors once again spring into action–ushering me
through my incompetence. They show me where to register for a hiking permit,
even snatching my passport out of my hand and giving it to the police officers.
When I don't have enough money to pay, the conductor hails a motorbike, which
whisks me to the nearest ATM. Bit by bit, I have inched toward the beginning of
my Langtang trek, yet no thanks to my own ingenuity. If it weren't on the local
bus to Langtang, I'd have never made it; that much I'm sure of.

When I'm almost beginning to wish it wouldn't end, the bus halts abruptly, and
the conductors gesture out the door. I peer across a cavernous river, topped by
a seemingly endless row of white-capped peaks. I depart.
